being able to control the level of water
and a river is beneficial in quite a few
ways historically Mills relied on water
power to drive saws grinding wheels and
other equipment raising the water level
in a river can also allow boats and
ships to navigate areas that would
otherwise be inaccessible finally having
control of a river can help mitigate the
damaging impacts of flooding but how do
we get this type of control over the
level in a body of water am Grady and
this is practical engineering on today's
episode or talking about Weir's
[Music]
this video sponsored by skill-shot the
best way to learn a new skill online
more on that later a weir is a small dam
built across a river to control the
upstream water level Weir's have been
used for ages to control the flow of
water in streams rivers and other water
bodies
unlike large dams which create
reservoirs the goal of building a weir
across a river isn't to create a storage
but only to gain some control over the
water level over time the term Weir has
taken on a more general definition in
engineering to apply to any hydraulic
control structure that allows water to
flow over its top often called its crest
in fact the spillways of many large dams
use Weir's as control structures so how
do they work if you watch my previous
video on the basics of open channel
hydraulics you'll remember that for
subcritical flow that is slow tranquil
flow seen in most rivers the depth is
controlled by downstream conditions that
means adding a weir across a river will
increase the water level upstream but by
how much depends on the flow this is the
equation for flow over a weir
we're not going to do any calculations
here but it's important to know the
factors that govern the performance of
our hydraulic structure this equation
says that the amount of flow that passes
over Weir depends on three factors the
length of the weir the height of the
water level above the crest of the weir
and this coefficient which changes
depending on the geometry of the weir
the graph of a hydraulic structures flow
versus water level is called its rating
curve and this is the rating curve for a
typical we're in many cases a weir is a
passive structure meaning that once it's
installed there's no way to change this
rating curve and that's not always ideal
streams and rivers are subject to
tremendous variability in flow rate the
hydraulic structure may normally flow a
small amount but in flooding conditions
bs2 pass incredible volumes of water
with a passive structure and fixed
rating curve that variability in flow
means tremendous variability in the
water level upstream during the flood a
weir may backup water badly enough to
cause damage upstream if you're using a
weir for a spillway
damn you might have to build your dam
much higher just to handle the water
level that occurs during very rare but
extreme cases increasing the overall
cost of the structure
ideally hydraulic structures used to
control water level would have a flat
rating curve meaning over a wide range
of flows you only get small changes in
level so how could we flatten this curve
going back to the weir equation there
are only two other parameters available
to increase the flow for a given water
surface we can approve the geometry of
the we are to increase its efficiency
different shapes of Weir's can pass flow
more efficiently and thus have a higher
discharge coefficient but this has a
practical limit the most efficient shape
for a weir is to match the curve that
the water would take off a sharp crest
this part of the flow is called the
Weir's nap and the shape that matches it
is called an OG with og crested weir as
we can get discharge coefficients as
high as around 4 but that's pretty much
the limit the other parameter we can
change is the length of the weir but in
many locations the available footprint
for the weir is a fixed size that can't
be increased even if the footprint isn't
fixed increasing the length of the weir
can add significant cost of course this
challenge is easy to address if we allow
for structures with moving parts many
dams and spillways have large gates or
valves to control flow there are a wide
variety of types of controlled outlets
use on hydraulic structures including
crest gates that act like we are that
can be raised or lowered the benefit is
that the structures capacity can be
increased while flows are high by
opening gates and then decrease when
flows return back to normal
controlled structures provide more
flexibility in how water gets released
or held back essentially turning a
static rating curve into a family of
curves that can be selected from to meet
operational goals of course controlled
outlets come with a major disadvantage
of increased complexity and in many
cases requiring an actual person be
available 24/7 to open gates and make
releases based on inflows so what if we
could get the benefit of a controlled
outlet without the disadvantages of
increased complexity and operational
obligation well there's one more trick
that hydraulic engineers have up their
sleeves remember when before I said you
could only fit a certain length of weir
within a fixed footprint that's not
completely true we can actually fold a
weir to get more length within a given
space this is called a nonlinear weir
and it's used in situations where you
want greater discharge within a given
footprint but without the need for
actively controlled outlets to show how
this works I built this flume and some
model Weir's this first weird just goes
directly across the flume with no bins
all mark the water level in the flume
first using the straight meter now with
the same flow rate I'll replace the
linear we're with the folded version
this has just about twice as much Weir
length in the same footprint you can see
that even though the weir is passing the
same amount of flow the water level
upstream is lower almost half the
distance to the crest from the original
level we flatten the rating curve
allowing for greater discharge at a
lower water level nonlinear Weir's with
folded cycles like this are called
labyrinth Weir's and they're becoming
more common as hydraulic control
structures they're also rectangular
versions called piano key Weir's
[Music]
it's easy to see how beneficial Weir's
can be from generating power to
improving navigation controlling
flooding and even acting as the
spillways of dams with all those
benefits there are some downsides as
well impoundments across rivers affect
the aquatic environment low-head dams
can also pose a serious danger to
swimmers and boaters a topic I'd like to
discuss in the future
in fact many old Weir's that are no
longer needed are being replaced or
completely removed to restore the river
to its natural state but as long as we
need to control the flow of water in our
constructed environment Weir's will
continue to be an important tool for a
hydraulic engineer thank you for
watching and let me know what you think
thanks to skills fair for sponsoring
this episode
one of my resolutions for 2019 is to do
more writing and improve my writing
skills you might not realize it but
before any practical engineering video
ever starts production I spend hours and
hours researching and a writing of
course there's no college classes for
engineering YouTube video production but
I don't have any formal training in
creative writing of any kind and I
definitely have plenty of room for
improvement skill share allows you to
learn new skills from experts in their
fields producing high-quality classes
like this one by comedian Matt Bell
aside that specifically focuses on
writing Internet content I'm almost
through this entire course and have
learned so many best practices and
things that I can use to improve my
writing there's just not another
platform where you can learn practical
skills to improve yourself with an
expectation of high quality and content
that's relevant to you if you're trying
to learn a new skill or improve on an
existing one cut through the clutter of
online tutorials and click on the link
in the description below to start
learning with skill share the first 500
people to sign up will get two months
free again thank you for watching and
let me know what you think
[Music]
you